Conflict: 
It may be defined as a struggle or contest between people with opposing needs, ideas, beliefs, values, or goals. The concise Oxford Dictionary defines conflict
as distress due to opposing of incompatible wishes etc. in a person. For example, a student wants to appear for entrance exams for English Major from two universities
and the date of exams is same. The student will be facing a conflict about it as she cannot appear for both the entrance exams. Helshe needs some guidance or
assistance to cope up with it. In other words the individual experiences a conflict due to simultaneous arousal of two or more needs, and helshe cannot satisfy one
without denying the other. An individual has several motives to achieve. Sometimes "two motives compete with each other and the satisfaction of one of the motives
leads to blocking of the other. For example, an individual may like to attend the class to be taken by the teacher whom he likes most or go for a movie which he has
been waiting to see. He fails to choose either of the two. This situation creates conflict in the mind of the individual. Conflicting situations create tension and a feeling of restlessness in our mind. In every conflict, the individual experiences certain degree of uneasiness and discomfort. You may resolve conflicts by seeking
advice from others or by analyzing and weighing the comparative merits and demerits of conflicting motives. An unresolved conflict is a state of stress and strain for the
individual.An analysis of the definitions of conflict reveals the following assumptions:A conflict is more than a mere disagreement. It is a situation in which people perceive a threat-physical, emotional, power, status etc. to their well-being.
Persons in conflict tend to respond on the basis of their perceptions of the situations rather than an objective review of it. As such, people filter their
perceptions through their values, culture, beliefs, information, experience, gender and other variables. Conflict responses are filled with ideas and feelings that
can be very strong and powerful guides to our sense of possible solutions. As in any problem, conflicts contain substantive, procedural and psychological
dimensions to be negotiated. In order to best understand the threat perceived by those engaged in a conflict, we need to consider all of these dimensions.
Conflicts are normal experiences within the work environment. They are also, to a large degree, predictable and expectable situations that naturally arise as
we go about managing complex and stressful projects in which we are sigmficantly invested. Creative problem-solving strategies are essential to positive approaches to
conflict management. We need to transform the situation from one in which it is my way or the highway into one in which we entertain new possibilities that
have been otherwise elusive.

Styles of conflict management:
1. Competing
This is a power oriented mode, in which one uses whatever power seems appropriate to win one's own position: one's ability to argue, one's rank or economic status. Competing might even mean standing up for your rights, defending a position which you believe correct, or simply trying to win. The skills involved in this style include:
Arguing or debating
Using rank or Influence
Asserting your opinions and feelings
Standing your ground
Stating your position clearly.
This style, however, can appropriately be used when quick action needs to be taken,
when unpopular decisions needs to be made, when vital issues must be handled, or
when one is protecting self-interest.
2. Avoiding Conflict Management
Many times people avoid conflicts out of fear of engaging in a conflict or because they do not have confidence in their conflict management skills. This style is
appropriate when you have issues of low importance, to reduce tension, or when vou are in a position of lower power. The skills involved in this style include:
Ability to withdraw.
Ability to leave things unresolved.
Ability to side step issues.
Senseoftiming.
3. Accommodating
This style is opposite to competing. When accommodating, an individual neglects his or her own concerns to satisfy the concerned of the other persons. There is an
element of self-sacrifice in this mode. This mode is appropriate when you are to show reasonableness, develop performance, create good will, or keep peace. Some
people use this mode when the issue or outcome is of low importance to them. The accommodating skills are:
Forgetting your desires
Ability to yield.
Selflessness.
Obeying Orders.
4. Compromising
Compromising can be defined as "giving up more than you want". Some define it as both parties winning. Compromise mode is appropriate when you are dealing with
issues of moderate importance, when you have equal power status, or when you have a strong commitment for resolution. Compromising mode can also be used as
a temporary solution when there are time constraints. The skills involved in compromising include:
Negotiating
Assessing value
Finding a middle ground.
Making concessions.
5. Collaborating
This style is opposite'to avoiding. Collaborating involves an attempt to work with the other person to find some solution which fully satisfies the concerns of both
persons. It means digging in to an issue to identify the underlying concerns of the two individuals and to find an alternative which meets both sets of concerns. This is
clearly the most effective approach of conflict management. Collaborative mode is appropriate when the conflict is important to the people who are constructing an
integrative solulion, when the issues are too important to compromise, when merging perspectives, when gaining commitment, when improving relationships, or when
learning. The collaborating skills are: 
Active listening
Educational Management
Iden-g concerns
Non-threatening confrontation
Analyzing input. 

Conflict resolution:
It is the process of ending a dispute and reaching an agreement that satisfies all parties involved. Since conflict is an essential part of being human, effective conflict resolution is not designed to avoid disagreements. Instead, conflict resolution skills are used to facilitate discussions, increase understanding and control emotional responses. Conflict resolutioncan be defined as the informal or formal process that two or more parties use to find a peaceful solution to their dispute. Levels of a conflict. I.Intrapersonal- Intrapersonal Conflict, which occurs within an individual, often involves some form of goal conflict or cognitive conflict. Goal conflict exists for individuals when their behaviour will result in outcomes that are mutually exclusive or have compatible elements (both positive and negative outcomes) II.Interpersonal - between individuals. Interpersonal conflict involves two or more individuals rather than one individual. Two managers competing for the same promotion, two executives maneuvering for a larger share of corporate capital examples of conflict between individuals are legion and quite familiar. III.Intragroup- within a group. IV.Intergroup -between group

Importance of conflicts: 
Conflicts help individuals, groups or organizations to: 
• Spot out problems that require attention. They help to identify areas requiring special attention. When addressed properly and in time, conflicts improve relationships and productivity. • Force issues to be clarified. 
• Make leaders to look for long-term solutions. 
• Direct efforts to finding solutions.
• Reduce ill feelings. Once people have expressed their hurt feelings and are listened to, they feel better. 
• Restore creativity and innovativeness. 
• Stimulate interest and curiosity. 
• Stir observation, memory, and reflection. 
• Create motivation and energy. 
• Increase people's understanding of positions and roles. 
• Increase individual awareness of self-identity. 
• Help in problem solving and decision-making 

Benefits of Conflict Resolution and Management:
A conflict arises when individuals have varied interests, opinions and thought processes and are just not willing to compromise with each other. It is always wise to adjust to some extent and try to find a solution to the problem rather than cribbing and fighting. Conflicts and disagreements only lead to negativity and things never reach a conclusion. It only adds on to the tensions and makes life hell. It actually leaves you drained and spoils your reputation. Every individual should try his level best to avoid conflict at the first place rather than resolving it later. Precautions must be taken at the right time to avoid a conflict. Building Relationships. Personal and professional relationships can often suffer from unresolved arguments. If two or more parties struggle to resolve their conflict, these feelings may lead to explosive behaviors and resentment later on. Communication, emotional awareness and empathy are crucial elements of conflict resolution that can lead to high-functioning and more satisfying relationships in all aspects of life. Rather than simply dismissing a relationship after a rough patch or argument, conflict resolution techniques can help you strengthen these relationships and prevent these issues in the future. Goal Achievement Ongoing conflict situations may stand in the way of completing goals, particularly in business relationships. When arguments arise in the workplace, productivity typically declines. It can be difficult to focus or work together on a project when underlying conflict is present. Resolving these issues at the root can lead to greater efficiency and goal achievement. In order to pass personal and professional milestones, it's important to utilize conflict resolution skills— particularly the ability to compromise, negotiate and move forward after a disagreement. Enhancing Commitment Conflict resolution can help bring people together once an issue is put to rest. One of the most important elements in conflict resolution is choosing to tackle problems as a team, rather than attacking each other. This technique is a wise way to enhance each party's commitment to the process, and avoid greater feelings of defensiveness. While conflict can be destructive, it can also be a sign of strong commitment and emotional attachment. By working with these feelings, each party can gain a better understanding of one another's goals and lead to greater dedication and loyalty moving forward. Generating New Insight . Resolution is important, but so is conflict in itself. When people have differing perspectives, this can open the door to new ideas, innovations and ways to solve a problem. Proper conflict resolution skills are designed to keep disagreements from escalating while continuing to discuss each point of view and eventually reach a collaborative conclusion. By using conflict resolution skills, you'll be better equipped to learn from and teach others in both professional and personal realms.

Conflict management:  
It helps to find a middle way, an alternative to any problem and successful implementation of the idea. Problems must be addressed at the right time to prevent conflict and its adverse effects at a later stage. Through conflict management skills, an individual explores all the possible reasons to worry which might later lead to a big problem and tries to resolve it as soon as possible. 
Conflict Management Skills: Conflict management can be approached using a variety of different styles. While these styles may differ, every method utilizes the same management skills. Conflict management skills are a set of skills that allows you to effectively resolve potential conflict. Without utilizing these skills, it becomes virtually impossible to reach an end of a dispute. Conflict management skills not only help to solve a negative conflict but also to minimize the negative consequences of each dispute, by achieving the best possible solution that satisfies everyone involved. 
Below are some of the core skills and characteristics that you'll need to adopt if you want to effectively manage a conflict. 
1.Effective communication Skills Effective communication skills are of utmost importance to prevent conflicts. While interacting with others, you have to take special care of your speech and the way you speak. Never ever shout on anyone, even if you do not agree with him. Always speak in a polite but convincing manner. Greet others with a warm smile. It works. Be very specific and precise in your speech. Do not use complicated words and confuse others. Keep a control on your tongue and do not use words which might hurt the sentiments of others. Avoid using abusive languages. 
2.Listening Skills An individual must not give his expert comments unless and until he is very clear what the other person wants. Always be a good listener. Don't just jump to conclusions and assume things on your own. Always listen to the other side of the story as well. 
3.Problem-solving There's no end to a conflict if there isn't a viable creative solution. Sometimes all parties involved get stuck and start believing that there's no such viable solution and that the conflict is impossible to solve. However, most conflicts can be solved, and problem-solving skills can greatly help you to find the solution. Even presenting baby steps towards a solution can reduce the tension and make the rest of the conflict go more smoothly. 
4.Discussion Don't just follow the rumor mills blindly, do discuss with others as well. Differences can crop up anytime but fighting would provide no solution. It is always better to sit and discuss the issues on an open forum. All the participants must give their inputs and efforts must be made to find out an alternative. Invite all the members involved and never ignore anyone as it would never solve the problem. Everyone has a right to express his views and a middle way has to be found. 
5.Patience Some conflicts are simple to overcome, while others can take time to resolve and make people pretty angry. That's why patience is such an important conflict management skill. One needs to be very patient to avoid conflicts.
6.Impartial An individual has to be impartial to avoid conflicts. Do not always support your friend. Stand by what is correct and never support what is wrong. Any individual, even if he is your friend must be corrected if you feel he is wrong. Listen to everyone and never ignore anyone just because you don't know him. Impartiality Another reason conflicts can be difficult to resolve is because they don't always stay focused on the conflict itself. The conflict can sometimes serve as an opportunity to air previous grievances that have developed between the involved parties over time. Now, the problem at hand can't be resolved until the historical issues are addressed. In this type of situation, it's best to separate the conflict from the people who are involved with it. Don't focus on the people and their personal characteristics. Instead, look at the problem itself and center your energy on finding a solution. 
7.Never Criticize Make the other person understand if he is wrong. Don't criticize him as it would definitely hurt his sentiments. The other person might not be as intelligent as you are, but you have no right to make fun of him. Others will look up to you if you guide the other person well and make him realize his mistakes. 
8.Positive Attitude Positive attitude is essential to avoid fights and conflicts. In offices, never ever play the Blame game. No one is perfect and if you have done anything wrong, have the courage to accept it. Human Beings are bound to make mistakes but never try to put the blame on anyone else's shoulders. Avoid backbiting as it only spoils the relationships. If you don't agree with anyone's views, discuss with him on his face, he will like it. Don't always find faults in others and be a little more adjusting as life is all about adjustments. 
9.Ignore others Individuals must try to adopt the middle path approach which considers the interests of one and all. Don't unnecessarily waste your energy for a person who is too adamant and is not willing to compromise at all. Ignore the person who is too demanding as it would solve half of your problems.
10.Avoid the blame game : Nobody likes to feel blamed. If anything, blaming someone will lead to them feeling defensive, and that's not a great mind state from which to solve problems. Instead, make sure that everyone in the conflict gets open space to share concerns without interruption. Then, work from everything that's been said to identify the most serious pain points. 

Causes of conflicts: 
1.Political factors. Ethnic conflict is particularly likely in states where ethnic groups lack sufficient representation in public and political institutions. Authoritarian one-party regimes with discriminatory legislation and a lack of opportunities for ethnic groups to participate in state decision-making processes are particularly prone to ethnic conflict. 2.Economic and social factors. Economic problems such as slowdowns, stagnation, deterioration, and complete collapse are sources of state destabilization and can lead to increased tensions and competition among ethnic groups. Discriminatory economic systems in which various groups are faced with inequitable options (in terms of economic opportunities, access to land and other resources, standards of living, and the like) generate resentment and also contribute to tensions and destabilization. Fast economic transitions (e.g., from centrally planned to market economies) and development can also aggravate instability by creating favourable conditions for domestic migration, urbanization, and other societal changes to which the existing political and social structures might not be able to adapt. These changes also can raise hopes for economic and political gains that might not come to fruition and might then serve as a source of frustration. 3.Cultural / Cultural differences. ractices, unequal educational opportunities, and restrictions on the use of minority languages—are common causes of ethnic conflict. 4.Unequal resource distribution. 5.Injustices/violation of human rights. 6.Territorial disputes or causes. 7.Bad governance e.g corruption. 8.Structural causes (conflict theory). 9.Religion. 10. Differences in ideology. 11. Miscommunication. 12. Information (lack of information). 13. Poverty. Effects of Conflicts. Death. Destruction of property e.g infrastructures. Underdevelopment hence povety. Psychological problems eg stress and anxiety. Displacement. Refugee problems. Creates mistrust which hinders teamwork and cooperation. Interference with foreign aid. Education e.g closure and destruction of schools. Interruption in emergency services. Environmental degredation